Welcome to this section of the course.
The goal here is to learn methods of analyzing and thinking about llms at the level of layers.
That is a level of granularity and organization that is higher than individual neurons and dimensions,
which you studied in the previous section.
Of course, layers are made up of dimensions and neurons, but you will see throughout this section
that we will adopt a slightly different way of thinking and approaching the activations in networks.
In this video, we will look at how activations in the Q, K and v vectors are related to each other
in terms of cosine similarity and Pearson correlation coefficient for different tokens.
In particular, we will use either identical tokens that are found in different sentences and thus have
different contexts or other random tokens.
And we will actually discover a few curious and strange looking patterns.
Some of these I will dig into a little bit more, and others I will just leave as a curious observation.
The code that I will show you in this video you will also use for the code challenge in the next video,
where you will use a much bigger model and do more involved analyses.
Anyway, let me now explain what I will do in the Python demo.
For this demo, I'll use GPT two and implant hooks to get activations from the Q, K, and V vectors.
Now this is nothing new.
You've seen this kind of code at the end of the previous section.
Then I will have 54 sentences that we will tokenize, batch and input into the model to get attention.
Activations.
Now when you look at these sentences, you can see that they all contain the word her.
That word is going to be our target word, meaning that I'm going to extract the activations from everywhere.
The word her appears.
Now, that's quite an interesting experimental approach, because the token itself is literally exactly
identical in every one of these sentences.
But of course, the contexts vary somewhat.
So you can also see that these sentences are different lengths.
And so they are going to have a different number of tokens.
And that will be a good reminder for how to tokenize into batches with padding.
After pushing the data through the model, you can see that the activations tensor is 54 by eight by
2304, that corresponds to 54 sentences Eight tokens per sentence, which includes the padding tokens
for sentences with fewer than eight tokens and 2304, corresponds to three times the embedding dimensionality
of GPT two small, which means that this wide matrix includes the Q, the V, and the k vectors all
concatenated.
Here you see a couple of plots of activations.
This left plot here with the green dots shows the Q vectors for two different sentences.
So each dot in this scatter plot corresponds to one of the dimensions in the Q matrix.
Now these are activations to exactly the same token in both cases, but they're coming from different
sentences.
The middle plot here shows the same thing, but for k vectors instead of q vectors.
And this plot on the right is slightly different.
So here each dot corresponds to the token for her in the 54 different sentences, and the axes correspond
to two dimensions of the q matrix, the q neurons.
So of course there are 768 of these dimensions in Q and the same number in k.
So it's a little arbitrary to show q dimension 123 here and dimension seven on the y axis.
I just picked these two dimensions at random to show this relationship.
So therefore I next calculated cosine similarity between all pairs of attention vectors.
And that will allow me to examine the distribution of cosine similarities within each of the three attention
matrices and across all of the pairs.
And that is what you see in these results here.
So these graphs show histograms of cosine similarity within and between attention matrices.
And by the way this is all just for one layer of the GPT model.
You will get to continue exploring different layers in the code challenge in the next video.
Anyway, let me draw your attention just to this graph over here so I can explain what the lines mean.
So let's just focus on this blue line for starters.
That blue line is labeled QQ and the x axis corresponds to cosine similarity.
And the y axis is density or count.
So basically this line shows that the cosine similarity between pairs of qq dimensions tends to be very
strong negative or very strongly positive.
So the magnitudes of the similarities is fairly strong and the signs can differ.
And this one scatter plot over here.
This is a modest positive correlation.
Maybe this is somewhere around 0.3 or something.
So this would be going into the bin at somewhere around here.
I will have more to say about creating and interpreting these plots when I switch to code, but this
is just to give you a heads up.
There's a few other curious observations that we will find here, including what these plots look like
when we use correlation instead of cosine similarity.
So I will explore a little bit to spark your interest and tickle your curiosity nerve.
Although a really deep analysis would require a lot more time than what I'm going to spend in this video.
Anyway, let's switch to Python and have a look.
Here are some libraries here.
I'm importing the GPT two small version and switching it to eval mode.
Importing the tokenizer of course.
And here I'm creating a variable that I will use quite a lot later in the code file called n embed.
This is just shorthand for modelconfig n embed.
As you are well aware, that number is 768 for GPT two small.
And I'm just creating a variable so I don't need to write all of this out.
And so I don't need to hard code it to 768 so that we can modify this code for larger versions of this
model.
Okay.
Here is the hook.
This is copied from the previous section.
So you've seen this code before.
Basically it's the attention sublayer of the transformer block.
And then I'm looking at C attention and grabbing the output.
So this is the q v and k vectors before the attention equation gets applied.
So I take the output of this linear transformation, detach it from all of the gradients and other computational
graph information, and then I transform it from a PyTorch tensor into a numpy array.
That is not strictly necessary, but it's going to make the subsequent analyses a little bit easier
because I prefer working with numpy than with PyTorch.
A bit of a personal preference there.
Okay, here are all the sentences.
I came up with a couple of sentences, and then I gave them to Claude and said, give me 50 more of
this type.
So they all have her the word her somewhere in the short sentences.
So pretty interesting experimental approach.
We have exactly identical tokens, but the context will differ from one sentence or one sequence to
the next.
Okay, now for this case, because these sentences will have different numbers of Of tokens, and we
want to create one batch for all of the token, all of the sentences.
Then we need to specify padding equals true.
And that gives us this as an output.
So you can see these are all the tokens.
And here at the end we have some padding tokens for all of the sentences that don't get up to eight
tokens in total.
And you can also see that the tokens 607 appears in various places in every one of these sequences.
This is the token for her.
It's technically space her because all of these sentences have space her in there.
And yeah, so that makes an interesting challenge for the analysis because it means that we cannot simply
grab, for example, like the fifth, uh, activation value in every sentence.
We're actually going to need to loop through every sentence in the activation every row in the batch
and find where we have the token corresponding to space here to get that specific activation.
And here you see the attention mask.
So it's all ones where there are valid tokens and zeros where we have pad tokens.
Okay.
And then here I am running all of those tokens all that that batch through the model.
This takes not so long.
And here I get an error message.
I suspect that I forgot to run this code here.
Okay.
So I didn't actually run that code cell.
So let's go back and do this again.
And we have the tokens.
And now we can actually do this okay.
And then yeah here I'm just printing out all of the keys and the shape.
So we see that there are 12 of the keys in this dictionary.
And of course that makes sense.
We start off with zero with the first transformer and GPT two.
Small has 12 transformers.
This size also makes sense 54 sentences, eight tokens including all of the Pad tokens, and 2304 activations,
or neurons, which corresponds to three times 768.
Okay, so for the rest of this script, we will just work with layer six.
Why layer six?
I don't know.
You can pick any other layer totally fine.
In the next video.
In the code challenge we will actually loop through all of the layers.
Okay.
As I mentioned, the target token space her appears in a different location in every sentence.
So therefore we need to loop through all of these sentences and find which index in that particular
sentence has the target.
And that's what I do here.
So I'm taking all of the tokens for this sentence and I want to use this method.
Index.
Token.
Target.
Now this index method is really great.
It's very convenient, but it only works on Python lists.
It is not defined for Python PyTorch tensors.
So therefore I have to convert the PyTorch tensor to a list.
This is very similar to what I mentioned at the end of the previous section, where I asked you to use
the method split to split up a wide matrix into the separate q, v and k vectors.
So same concept here where I want to use a particular method, but I need to convert to the data type
just to be able to use that method.
Anyway, the upshot of all that is that this variable here, target id will be the index of the target
token for space in each of the individual sentences, and from that I can grab the activations from
this layer, from this sentence and this target index.
Now this right here is always going to be the activation for the word her.
But to have a reference set of activations, a non-target activations, I'm going to use the token immediately
preceding that word, which is not any consistent word across sentences.
So here it's going to be the word on here it's the here it's informed or whatever is the token before
her married and so on.
So every single non-target token will be random.
And it's going to be different compared to the target token which will always be her.
So that is the idea.
So I'm getting all the activations for the target and for the non-target okay.
There we go.
Runs quite fast and we see that it's again 54 by 20 304 because we have 54 sentences.
So now 54 words and activations across all of the attention matrices.
And then this is the target matrix.
So then we have exactly the same size for the non-target matrix.
Okay.
This code is just generating the figure that I showed in the slides.
Pretty interesting to see that.
Uh, in this case the word is exactly the same.
It's the word her space her that token that doesn't change.
What does change is the context in which that word appears.
So the preceding tokens are different.
And then we see that the, uh, the activations are slightly different.
You know, I didn't actually calculate the correlation coefficient, but I would guess it would be above
0.9.
So yeah, in this plot, and these two plots.
The two axes correspond to two different sentences.
And every dot that you see here corresponds to a different dimension in the Q matrix or the V matrix.
And that is plotting the other way from what I show here in this plot, where here I'm isolating two
specific dimensions.
So I just pick these two at random of the Q matrix.
And now every square in this scatter plot corresponds to a different word.
So a different sentence of the word activation for the word her.
Okay.
So now we are going to shift our focus to this plot and run this correlation or cosine similarity for
all possible pairs within and across all of the attention matrices.
So to calculate the cosine similarities across all pairs of neurons across all three matrices I implement
cosine similarity using code that you've seen in multiple videos earlier in this course.
I'm doing this in two lines of code using matrix multiplication.
So essentially cosine similarity can be calculated as just the dot products of all of the pairs of vectors,
which we can implement as the matrix multiplication of the data matrix transpose by itself.
Now this alone is not cosine similarity.
It becomes cosine similarity when the vectors are normalized.
And so that's what I do here.
So I divide by the matrix norm.
And then that gives me normalized vectors.
And then we get the cosine similarity.
So this is for the target words and for the non-target words.
And here you can see uh what those uh all those vectors look like.
So again this is vectors by vectors.
So the q vectors are in the beginning and then the so the query vectors, then the keys vectors and
then the values vectors here.
And what you see here is the distribution the histogram over all of the pairs.
So every cosine similarity in this matrix you can see that they range from minus one to plus one.
Those are the two absolute extremes of what we can possibly get with cosine similarity.
Of course, the numbers are trivially equal to one for the the diagonal.
So when the vectors equal themselves.
But you do see a lot of really, really strong cosine similarity values.
Now that's not really that surprising when we think about the fact that we are looking at the same token
and dimensions within the same matrix.